On March, 25 2025 the Board of County Commissioners ratified the MOA (Memorandum of Agreement) in regards to the WSO 287 (g) program (Warrant Service Officer). This means that trained correctional officers have the power and authority to serve warrants of arrest for immigration violations. They also have the power and authority to serve warrants of removal. One thing to not here, **this only applies to individuals already in custody**. They are not able to go out into the community and make arrests. The WSO is the narrowest version of the different 287 (g) models, it is also the only one that is required legally and the trickiest one to get rid of. Now notice that this WSO only applies to County Correction officers and Sheriffs that run jails, on February 26th, 2025 all 67 counties that operate a jail entered into a 287 (g) agreement. The minimum being the WSO model though some may have a different model. As of 2025 17 correction officers in Orange County were "trained" and credentialed as a WSO's. 

What does this all mean? For starters we have an opportunity to agitate and mobilize around any other 287 (g) agreement. This means UCF's task force model or Orlando Police Departments etc. the list goes on and on and this is how Immigration Imitative is developing it's primary, secondary and tertiary objectives throughout this End to 287 (g) campaign.

This leads us to Intergovernmental Services Agreement which is technically not apart of 287 (g). Since 1983 Orange County has maintained an IGSA with the United States Marshals Service for housing federally or convicted individuals. In 2011, the agreement was modified to include the housing of individuals with an immigration hold from ICE or Customs of Border Protection. Orange County is one of the few counties with an IGSA for immigration housing. **Please review slides 13-15 of the WSO/IGSA presentation for statistics of people held in custody through this IGSA.** Under our current IGSA, Orange County receives $88/day in reimbursement for the costs associated with housing federal inmates.  However, on August 11, 2025, Orange County formally sent notice to the USMS, requesting to renegotiate our IGSA, based upon more recent calculations of the costs associated with housing federal inmates in Orange County facilities. Mayor Demings and his crew did some data crunching and calculated that the costs are currently calculated to be $180/day, per inmate. This calculation is based upon the expense of providing a "secure environment", as well as providing "appropriate healthcare" and access to the "basic human needs" experienced by an inmate in Orange County facilities. Since August 11, 2025, Orange County Corrections has received 3,626 additional ICE inmates, which means a deficit of $92/day, according to Mayor Demings and crew.

Our humanitarian Mayor graciously states "I am deeply concerned that the fiscal impact of these legislative mandates is being unfairly shouldered by the taxpayers of Orange County, to the tune of over $333,592.00.  To date, supporting federal and state immigration mandates has cost our county’s taxpayers hundreds of thousands of dollars, which is a hefty burden for any local government to pay. This financial burden has had a substantial impact to our county budget for which we are not receiving reimbursement from the federal government, nor from the state of Florida." Alongside this lies the problem of rebooking. ICE was able to circumvent the law by allowing them to rebook people under new booking numbers resetting the 72 hour clock. They are only supposed to be held for 72 hours but with this method they can be held longer artificially, this prolongs detention without due process and causes issues where lawyers can not find their clients as the booking numbers are slow to update etc.  In a previous letter, sent Feb. 3, Demings said the jail will stop letting ICE rebook detainees in order to hold them without charges for longer than 72 hours. Will need to verify this and see if this has stopped. 

So now we have arrived to what took place on March 1st and the March 13th deadline. To recap IGSA is the way that the Orange County gets reimbursed for holding Immigrant detainees in it's jails. Mayor Demings has sent two letters to the USMS asking for their "proper reimbursement" and in this second letter has even threatened terminating the IGSA. Here is where things get interesting. In the presentation that discusses Orange County's participation with IGSA and 287g the term BOA (Basic Ordering Agreement) is mentioned several times as a threat of what will happen if the IGSA is terminated. **I will note here that this presentation happened in July of 2025.**  BOA's are the agreements that counties sign that do not have an IGSA, so I would imagine that is most counties in Florida as Orange County is one of the few with an IGSA. More research should be done on what other counties this could apply too. 

Through the language of the presentation the BOA is presented as a threat almost of what will happen if Orange County does not continue with IGSA. **One thing to note, these agreements are not required so the BCC saying that if IGSA is terminated they will be mandated to sign a BOA is untrue.** That would be a voluntary decision. What really would happen is they would receive less reimbursement money. Now we have reached the core of what this is all about. Money. Orange County is thinking about terminating IGSA because they are not receiving the full reimbursement. Orange County is trying to get the most money out of this situation and them fear mongering about the BOA is simply the course of action they will try and take if IGSA is terminated. **It is important to note that the reimbursement rate for BOA is about 50 dollars a day per inmate, and if you remember the County calculated that they should be getting 180 dollars a day PER INMATE. So if the county had 361 detainees a day for seven days at their proposed reimbursement rate they would be owed (Okay so disclaimer I am a historian not a math guy so I think it'd be over 450,000 for just seven days. Please double check my math.)&#32;** If they terminate the IGSA and still want to hold immigrants in Orange County jails then they would have the option of signing the BOA receiving far less than what they would with IGSA. This may be what they are prepping for because as of March 1st, Orange County is limiting the amount of detainees in its jail In January the jail averaged 361 detainees per day. That included a daily average of 142 being held for ICE with no local criminal charges. As of March 1st, Orange County has capped the number of those being held without charges at 66 men and 64 women. Mayor Demings isn't afraid of federal backlash or disrupting the long relationship held with federal partners. Its all about money, which is why terminating IGSA is on the table. There is a chance that this is a bluff to secure the reimbursement funds. We shall see after March 13th which if negotiations are not held then the County will revisit its options. 

So what is to be done?

The Board of County Commissioners has opened up Pandora's box. In their pursuit of reimbursement they have opened up a great opportunity for agitation and fuel for our campaign. We see this as a stepping stone in our wider End to 287g campaign. We are hosting a public comment workshop and will be mobilizing at the next BCC meeting on March 10th to speak about everything covered above. This struggle could go on for the next few months so we are moving to educate and organize around this issue especially in neighborhoods we have inroads in alongside organizations that will also organize around this issue. Locally Immigrants Are Welcome Here Coalition and 50501 have been tackling this issue in the most ineffective manner. They have been putting pressure on the BCC for months now but they are prioritizing the BCC to file a lawsuit urging the county to get clarification on its legal obligations to cooperate with ICE. The letter urged the county "to vindicate its right" to withdraw from the immigration enforcement portions of the IGSA. There is no need for a lawsuit as the BCC is able to terminate the IGSA at anytime so we find that it is a better use of time to educate people and hold consistent actions as there is a very real chance that the IGSA is terminated. The BCC has backed itself into a corner. If they took the deficit and didn't put termination on the table this would be a completely different analysis yet here we are. There are already three County Commissioners that would support this termination and have been vocal about this in the past. Two of them have been vocal against 287g so there is a chance of support from county commissioners themselves.